Today? Yeah, well, that's right. We always have that case.
Now we've got not 30 minutes-
Why not, mate?
Yep. We have a committee that likes to ask questions.
So please, do a summary, but do not overegg it because-
Yeah. No, no
... I will have people going...
Please. Thank you.
Right. Please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and kia ora koutou katoa.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the committee.
My name is Dennis Clifford. I'm the Chief Commissioner of
Te Tare Tu Rei,
Criminal Cases Review Commission.
I'm joined by Paula Rose, Deputy Chief Commissioner, and
Parakahi McLean, our Chief Executive.
The commission was established in 2019 as an independent
Crown entity to review conviction and sentences where
there may have been a miscarriage of justice.
Our role is to provide an independent pathway for people who feel
they may have been wrongly convicted or sentenced, and to
refer cases back to the appellate courts where we consider that is in the
interests of justice.
In doing this work, we form part of the wider justice system, providing
an important safeguard alongside the courts and appeal
processes.
I've been Chief Commissioner since December 2024.
Paula and Parakahi have held their positions since 2020.
We acknowledge the work of previous and current commissioners and
staff over what is now the first five years of the commission's
existence.
Before the commission existed, people relied on the prerogative of
mercy progress,
which was widely criticized as difficult to access
and lacking a power of independent investigation.
In many cases, the commission represents the last opportunity for an
independent review of a conviction or sentence.
Our work strengthens trust in the justice system and Aotearoa,
New Zealand, including for victims and their whānau.
The written responses cover the
'24/25 reporting year.
During that period, we have continued focusing on reducing the
backlog of applications
while continuing to assess new cases.
The term backlog refers to applications the commission
received in its first two years of existence, which are
still under investigation.
The number of those cases totaled 308 in all,
well in excess of the number anticipated at the time of the commission's
establishment.
As at
30 June '24, the number of the backlog was
126.
As of 30 June '25, it was 87.
Today, it's 65, and we are hoping for
equivalent progress as we move forward.
The commission's legislation requires it to have a particular focus on
groups disproportionately affected by the criminal
justice system.
Māori applicants represented 38% of our
applications last year,
and applications from Pacific peoples increased from 1% to
5%.
Those outcomes reflect the impact of outreach
and education work,
including within organizations
associated with the justice sector and in prisons
directly.
Work on our Section 12 inquiry into eyewitness
identification evidence is progressing.
We refined the scope to focus on legal safeguards and police
procedures under the Evidence Act.
A report will be delivered in June.
In closing, I acknowledge the staff and commission for their work and
welcome any questions the committee may have.
Okay, so we've got Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Yes.
Kia ora judge and other members.
I'm interested in the
eyewitness identification program that you've got.
Yes.
And obviously it's
been reported a little bit.
Yes.
In particular, I can understand that the backlog has been a
problem and that you've got to allocate resources.
But you've narrowed the scope,
in a way which makes it appear at least relatively
legalistic.
Whereas
a lot of the concerns around eyewitness
evidence are in that kind of cognitive
space about how unreliable what people
remember is. And the other aspect that really is of
concern is
the
preponderance of erroneous identification
across race. So a Pākehā is more likely to
misidentify a Māori than a Pākehā.
And given what's going on in our justice system,
I guess I'd invite you to kind of
comment or even defend not looking at what
most people see as one of the most concerning aspects of eyewitness evidence.
Thank you for that question.
You're right. The scope of modern
cognitive psychological science
is growing.
Our understanding
is improving,
and the difficulty with that in a way is, as you've
identified, the risk of unreliability seems
to grow and grow and grow. And,
as an ex-judge, I am not certain over
time how the traditional way we have heard cases
will adapt to that growing
scienceFor the
inquiry,
we started off the inquiry with a focus
on the procedures for taking eyewitness
identification required of the police pursuant to the Evidence
Act.
The scope
broadened, or potentially broadened, very much in
response to some of the expert feedback we got
from the people we were talking to on the issues you referred to.
I think it's fair to say that in hindsight,
we bit off more than we could chew in that space.
We don't have
the scientific
expertise in particular to take very
specific
psychosocial insights and translate them
into concrete law reforms. To be quite honest, it's somewhat
beyond our resources. But what we can do, and what we are doing, is in a
very practical way, a lot of that science is reflected in
the requirements for the taking of eyewitness identification,
double-blind procedures, and a variety of additions to what's
currently found in the Evidence Act, and that's what, subject to
consultation, we'll be reporting back on in June.
Yeah, I guess because if you look at other areas of the
criminal law, and sexual offending is one-
Yeah
... where you look at the directions that are given to juries-
Yes
... and they've changed, and you'd know this better than me, they've changed
wildly-
Yep
... over the years, right?
Yep.
Whereas eyewitness identification hasn't really.
We've always said it could be unreliable.
Is there a gap? Does that gap need to be filled,
given that there's increasing concerns
around
cognitive inability-
Yeah
... but also serious bias?
Yeah.
That's a very good question.
One of the things we did look at was whether or not to
make the requirement for a judicial warning
mandatory, and I don't think we're going to recommend that.
But we are going to note that in this area, the type of warning that is
given has to be under review at all times.
I was reading the expert
feedback we had had just the other night, and
it is broad, and it's challenging.
As you say, and so yes, perhaps there is room for improvement
to the judicial direction on the risks that we now know about.
But at this point, I don't think we're going to get to that in this inquiry.
Okay. I've got Dr. Sue Ng.
Thank you. Thank you all for coming.
I want to ask a few questions in terms of, I guess, the
performance
first
before we get into some of the financials.
Yeah.
So in terms of performance, you do mention in terms of backlog, and look what we're
seeing is, first question is, you're receiving more
every year than what you can resolve.
What mechanism would you do to
ensure that that backlog gets cleared, or anticipating the volume
of referrals with sexual that you do receive?
Is that a budgetary thing? Is it an efficiency thing?
Is it increasing the threshold of how you analyze things?
Mm-hmm.
Education?
That's the first question.
Yep.
And I have a couple subs.
Yeah, okay.
Well, you're right.
We have not yet got to what you might call a steady state business
as usual working model.
And what I mean by that is we received more applications at the start than
we anticipated, or that were anticipated, not that we anticipated.
And we continue to receive an increasing number.
So within our current resources, we
are
actively reviewing our case analysis
procedures at the present time,
with a view to focusing
resources on identifying the cases that are more likely than
not
to have-
Yeah
... aspects of the well-known miscarriage of justice
types,
and to respond to others that don't have those more
quickly, and it's a challenge, but-
Just to add to the Chief Commissioner, we are also
prioritizing-
Mm
... our
work consistently. We're doing that and have done that from the beginning.
So that responds to that question that you've asked us about getting
through casework efficiently.
So that's something that we are doing proactively.
Supplementary, Chair.
Yeah.
All of that is really good, but a lot of that depends on having
sufficient staff and staff retention. What's the staff retention like?
Our staff retention certainly over the last year has been high,
the turnover.
Yeah.
But our focus has been on, and people leave for a variety of
reasons. We are a small entity, so where there are
other opportunities to progress, that has certainly been a
significant reason. This year, our focus is very much on
stability.
We built our internal capability.
We continue to focus on that, and we'll continue to do that going forward.
And one final supplementary.
We're seeing kind of across the board in some of the public services, ombudsman
being one of them, for example, that's been receiving a
drastic increase, and they're exploring other opportunities for efficiencies,
including things like potentially AI and et cetera.
Yeah.
Is that something that your agency is looking into for some of the administrative
tasks?
We are looking into AI.
AI in the legal area has a bit of a mixed record-
Mm
Thus far, and you have to be very careful about it.
And obviously we're dealing with incredibly sensitive and confidential
information, so some of the easy ways of using AI are simply not open
to us.
Mm.
But yes, I think there's real potential for AI, and as it were,
doing the
legwork of analyzing the background to an application, the background that
already exists in court documents and other official records.
All right, good. I've got Dan Rosewell.
Thank you, Chair. So the Commission's outreach and education work
is essential to ensuring people understand how to access your
services.
How effective have those efforts been in reaching communities who traditionally
have less access to that legal support?
Mm.
Well, the chief executive can probably comment on some of the more
operational aspects of that question, but certainly,
you know in our legislation we're required to focus and report
on what we observe in terms of groups disproportionately
affected by the criminal justice system.
And, it's a bit of a double-edged sword, but the
increase in applications we receive
this... we are receiving this calendar year would
suggest that our outreach has been effective in encouraging people to
apply to us.
And have you done anything specifically for those
individuals that have literacy challenges?
Well,
in terms of outreach, and maybe I'll comment on it, and it
happens at different levels. So over the period of review,
we visited all of the corrections facilities.
But in addition to that, we go out into and
engage with different groups and organizations that either work in the
criminal justice system and/or we
know have
the opportunity, I guess, from a public awareness
perspective, to increase that
from time to time. If I think about what we did this year, we went to Waitangi in
February. That was the first time we'd had a-
Mm
... presence there. And,
we were able to speak to a variety of people about the work of the
Commission. That's not necessarily where we're going to get
applications, but it certainly speaks to our raising
public awareness about the work that we do.
Mm.
And if I may, one of the opportunities that we provide for
applicants who may be challenged by
literacy or language issues is interviewing them-
Good
...
and taking information from them rather than
expecting them to produce a written copy of their
application.
Mm.
Thank you. Yeah, you want a go?
I'd just be keen to hear in terms of the...
Because now you've been around for five years.
You gave us some statistics today, I think, or very recently
on
what people complain about. I'd be keen to
understand what areas
you find most frequently problematic, which give rise
to you referring a case, I think, back to the Court of Appeal is where it goes.
Is-
If it's an appeal process that's
stopped at the High Court,
like from the District Court-
Right
... to the High Court, we refer it to the High Court.
Yeah.
But otherwise, generally it's the Court of Appeal.
Yeah. But I'm just interested to know-
Yeah
...
what's going wrong. Where's it going wrong most often?
Well, I think-
Sure
...
as you're probably aware,
there was a Thorpe report done- ...
back in the early 2000s. And
that... And I learned about this since I've been on the job.
And it goes back to an analysis that was done right back in the
1920s by a New York, an American judge, into
what Haitian miscarriages of justice, and there's about seven
things, seven sets of circumstance.
And they're pretty much what we see today.
And some of them are, for example,
eyewitness evidence.
You get often there's a combination of a high-profile case,
difficult to solve, police under pressure, and police can get what's called a
tunnel vision approach, so that they see someone early on and that's really where
they focus.
Police practices for taking witness statements.
Some problems with incentivized witnesses.
It's very-
Yeah
... if you go back to that, I don't mean to be flippant about it, but if you go
back to that report by Thorpe-
No, I was inter-
It's all those things.
Yeah. I know of that.
Yeah.
But you're not seeing any particular...
You're not seeing, for example, jailhouse snitches as a particular problem.
Too early to really-
Too early?
Yeah.
Mm.
Just not enough data.
I think we've seen the gamut. Whether you could say in
New Zealand's case one of those is a problem that is more
prevalent here than you might have expected from other sources
of understanding, probably a bit early for that, but-
Can I ask then, one of them-
Yeah
... in the to-do list is non-disclosure-
... of relevant information.
Yes.
Of all the lists-
Yeah
... most of the list is your sentence was too harsh, you
didn't take into my background.
Yeah.
Worried about witness, all that sort of stuff.
But the one about the non-disclosure of relevant material, what is
that? Just to be...
Well, that's
a phenomenon that
we now have
the Criminal Evidence
Disclosure Act for criminal proceedings.
So there's a formal piece of legislation that
controls the fact that police
have always, as a matter of common law, been meant to
provide all relevant investigatory materials
they generate to a defendant in the interests of a fair
trial.The fact is they don't always or haven't always.
There's no gain saying that.
And is that an oversight or is that deliberate?
It can be both-
Mm-hmm
... Mr. Chair.
Right. Okay.
Because of all the concerns, to me, that's-
Yeah
... probably the systemic issue as opposed
to a personal issue-
Yeah
... that you didn't pick.
Yeah.
So just on that systemic issue,
coming back to Duncan's point,
is that something that's worrying you in terms of the quantum
or the changing scale of it or...?
Well,
Deputy Chair said to it, I don't think that
worries us in the sense of the seeing there's so much more of
it than you would ever have expected.
Right.
I think when it happens, it worries you.
Yeah.
And I think the
answers to that are both the legislative response we've received and the
cultural response you get from the police when
everyone starts seeing a miscarriage of justice as
being a systems problem
because the system isn't working properly.
Yeah.
And when you get a commitment to openness and investigatory processes
within the necessary bounds of confidentiality, then that will improve over
time.
Okay. Now I've got a question from Raymond Nayak here.
Yep. Hello.
Hello.
Kia ora.
Page 13 of the report,
you outline activities focused on those
disproportionately affected-
Yes
... by the criminal justice system.
Yes.
And under objective number four, victim engagement,
you continue to engage with experts, police, and advocates to ensure
victims' perspectives were considered-
Ah, yes
... in our mahi.
Yes.
How deep is that engagement? Because respectfully, the word
considered for me isn't-
No, no. Fair call
... as strong-
We have a real-
There's other words
... commitment
to being sensitive too and responsive to the
interests of victims in our processes.
I'll ask the chief executive to comment in a bit more detail.
But
obviously, if you are reopening a traumatic case-
Mm
... then victims are going to be
potentially adversely affected.
On the other hand, if there has been a miscarriage of justice and the
wrong person has been convicted, then everybody's
adversely affected because the right person, the offender, is
not in prison.
And so
it's a question of not
reacting too quickly
to a possible victim issue because you might just be starting
off the investigation. But I'll ask the chief executive to talk over
that because it's been a focus from the Commission from the start, and she knows
more about it.
So we have a very strong and constructive working relationship with
the chief victims advisor,
both the present and her predecessor.
So in fact, it was only two weeks ago,
me and the team met with Ruth over this
particular matter around traumatized victims and
how we're dealing with that. As the chief commissioner has said, we're
very sensitive too, and we're very careful and
respectful when we are treating
with victims of the work that we do.
So that relationship does go deep.
In fact, we've had feedback even on our standard operating
procedures in dealing with victims,
having received advice from the chief victims advisor, both the
previous and the current
chief victims advisors. So we work very sort of closely with you.
Mm-hmm.
Okay. Are you right, Raymond?
Thank you.
Right. I've got a question from Helen White.
Sure.
Thank you.
Judge, this is actually probably could have been a sub to something that you talked
about, which is your investigative style-
Yes
... when you're actually going and talking to people-
Yeah. Yes
... who might have
problems really being articulate.
I didn't work in this field. I worked in employment law, but we have an
inquisitorial process.
Yeah.
And I saw that go wrong a lot because people who
were less articulate couldn't really put their case
in the same way.
Yeah.
And the investigative style could make that worse
rather than better. Could you tell me, do you think there are lessons that
you've learned in those discussions about
how to maybe standardize an approach which
is inquisitorial like that,
but responds in a way that is
cognitive of the fact that people are often less
articulate but still may be innocent?
Good question.
Okay.
I think
where this first occurs is our
initial... Or particularly, is our initial response to an application.
We have a low threshold for our applications.
There's no cost.
There's no requirement to have legal advice.
There's no particularly technical content required.
Mm-hmm.
And so as a first step, our investigators
will go and talk to the applicant
one-on-one. It's
part of the investigation, but it's not
inquisitorial.
Mm-hmm.
It is really exploring with that person
what they're trying to communicate to us, what they're trying to
say, and often
what they will tell us has never been properly heard
before.
Mm-hmm.
And look,
I came from a judicial background where you're sitting up on the bench and you're
getting evidence that's been gone through and through and through.
I'm really impressed since I've joined the Commission with the way the
investigatory staff, in particular that do this role, are
committed. It's reflected in our values, the values
ofThe commission as a whole,
which the chief executive will remember more fully than I
do in their words. But
I see it's a real difference from having been a judge
to sitting in this role, and the real difference is that this group of
people really work hard to understand and get inside
the person.
Mm.
And as I said before,
at the end of the day, there will only be so many applications that get the answer
they want. But on the other hand, if all the people go away thinking they've
had a fair crack of the whip, perhaps for the first time, then we'll have
done a good job.
Thank you.
Okay. Now we've got three minutes left. Mr. Jamie Arndtz.
Oh, it's really a follow-on. I was really interested in how you triage the
cases-
Yeah
... because from where you started, say, five years ago-
... to where you are now-
Yeah
... and you've got a more streamlined process, but you've still got things
around natural justice.
Yes.
So how has that changed?
Well, yeah.
That is the challenge, and that's the balance you have to strike.
And I think what we're trying to do over time
is
front-end
particular parts of the process.
This is a bit like case management.
As a judge, I knew the trouble with case management was lawyers don't like being
asked to do things until they really have to do them.
So if you're trying to case manage a case so that they all come along on
day one and tell you what the problem is they want to be solved, you can't do it
because they wait till the last day before court.
In our case, we have
our own power of investigation. Incredibly important.
We have an independent power of investigation.
So we can use that power to, in answer to your question, sir, to
use sort of a...
It's a common sense approach to
taking what the person is trying to tell you, and
fairly and intelligently seeing
what we think, based on our experience, might actually
be behind
the words that we're hearing. That's the best way I can explain it, if that makes
sense.
All right.
Right. Last one to Dr. Suman. Just one
quick one. Okay. Just one. Actually, on that investigation, I'm going to ask
that one. Your target was seven and you met five, the Section
25 investigation.
Can I just check, is seven the actual...
Proportionally, how many would you be doing?
Because if you're like, "Well, there was only five, so we only investigated
five"- Yeah ... then- I'm not sure what the- Then-
What's the, um- This would be
page-
Which question?
... seven of your report. Impact three, "I'm going to have confidence in the
justice system through identifying improvement.
Number of Section 25 investigations completed during the year and the
30 days of- Oh, okay ... 30 days of term" Okay, that's the number completed. Yes.
So Section 25 is the deepest dive we do. Yeah.
So that's when we think there may very well be a problem, and we commit
resources to it. Yeah. There are currently 25 of those as a
group. Okay. And so we cleared through seven of them.
That's what the number's saying last year.
One of which was a referral to the Court of Appeal.
Mm.
And- So it went the whole way ... is it we are prioritizing progress on these
investigations?
Mm-hmm.
Yes.
Okay.
How do you prioritize them? Well, I think
it's a very good question, and I'd love to have a simple answer to it, but- Sorry.
That's okay. These things take a lot of time.
By the time we get them, there's piles of paper this high.
So you've got to work out a way to cut through all the dross and get to the heart
of it, and that's really what we're encouraging people to do.
And in the Section 25s in particular, every now and then you have to stop,
look what you've achieved, understand what it's saying to you, refocus, and
move on.
Okay. I'd like to thank all three of you for coming this afternoon. Thank you.
Thank you.
It's great that you did come.
It's an area that people perhaps don't focus on enough.
No, look, some- But thank you for all your hard work and what you do for the
community. Thank you very much for your time-
Thank you very much
... all of you, and for your interesting questions.
Thank you.
Ka kite atu.